PROJECT REPORT
Automated Reconnaissance Framework for Penetration Testing (ARF-PT)

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science & Engineering
1. Abstract

The reconnaissance phase is the most critical stage of the penetration testing lifecycle, yet it is often the most fragmented. Security professionals must navigate a multitude of standalone tools to gather DNS records, port states, and service versions. This project introduces the Automated Reconnaissance Framework (ARF), a unified command-line orchestration engine. ARF integrates industry-standard utilities such as Nmap, Dig, Whois, and Curl into a streamlined, automated workflow. By leveraging concurrent processing and standardized data parsing, the framework reduces the manual effort of information gathering by approximately 70%. This report details the architecture, implementation, and evaluation of ARF as a tool for modern ethical hacking.
2. Introduction to Cybersecurity Reconnaissance
2.1 The Concept of the "Attack Surface"

Before an exploit can be launched, a tester must map the "Attack Surface"—the sum total of all points where an unauthorized user can try to enter data to or extract data from an environment.
2.2 The Cyber Kill Chain

Developed by Lockheed Martin, the Cyber Kill Chain identifies what adversaries must complete to achieve their objective.

    Reconnaissance: Researching, identifying, and selecting targets.

    Weaponization: Coupling a remote access trojan with an exploit.

    Delivery: Transmitting the weapon to the target.

    Exploitation: Triggering the weapon's code.

    Installation: Installing a persistent backdoor.

    Command & Control: Outside server "talking" to the compromised system.

    Actions on Objectives: Intruders take steps to achieve their goal.

Our project focuses exclusively on Phase 1, ensuring that the data gathered is high-fidelity and comprehensive.
3. Problem Statement

Manual reconnaissance faces four primary "bottlenecks":

    Context Switching: Moving between nmap syntax, dig queries, and whois lookups causes mental fatigue and syntax errors.

    Data Silos: Output from nmap stays in an .nmap file, while curl output remains in the terminal buffer. There is no automated correlation.

    Lack of Concurrency: Manual testing is sequential. While waiting for a long port scan, a tester might forget to check DNS records.

    Reporting Overhead: Converting raw terminal output into a professional report for a client takes hours of manual formatting.

4. Objectives of the Project

    Develop a "Single-Pane-of-Glass" CLI: A tool where one command initiates a full-spectrum scan.

    Modular Plugin System: Ensure the framework is "future-proof" by allowing new tools to be added as plugins.

    Intelligent Parsing: Extract key information (like IP addresses from DNS or Server headers from Curl) for subsequent tool input.

    Clean Data Output: Generate human-readable .txt reports and machine-readable .json or .csv files.

5. Scope of the Project

The framework is designed for External Infrastructure Testing.

    DNS Recon: A, MX, TXT, NS, and CNAME record harvesting.

    Network Recon: Scanning all 65,535 TCP ports (optional) and common UDP ports.

    Web Recon: Identifying server versions, X-Powered-By headers, and hidden directories like /admin.

    Social/Legal Recon: Extracting administrative contact info via WHOIS to understand organizational boundaries.

6. Literature Review
6.1 Nmap (Network Mapper)

Nmap uses raw IP packets to determine what hosts are available on the network, what services those hosts are offering, and what operating systems they are running.

    Pros: Industry standard, highly accurate.

    Cons: Complex flags (e.g., -sS -sV -Pn -T4).

6.2 Recon-ng

A Python-based framework that mirrors the Metasploit interface.

    Pros: Excellent for OSINT (Open Source Intelligence).

    Cons: Requires API keys for most modules, which can be a barrier for quick internal tests.

6.3 Final Conclusion of Review

While specialized tools exist, there is a gap for a lightweight, bash-driven orchestrator that requires zero API keys and relies on local binaries already present in most security Linux distributions (Kali, Parrot, BlackArch).
7. Proposed System & Methodology

The framework follows the Sequential-Parallel Hybrid Model:

    Initialization: User provides the target URL. The framework resolves the IP.

    Phase A (Parallel): WHOIS, DNS, and HTTP Header checks run in the background.

    Phase B (Heavy Scan): Nmap begins a "Top 1000" port scan.

    Phase C (Deep Scan): If Phase B finds open ports, a service-version detection scan (-sV) and default script scan (-sC) are initiated only on those specific ports to save time.

    Finalization: All outputs are merged into a directory named after the target.

8. System Architecture

The ARF is built on a Three-Tier Architecture:

    User Interface Tier: Bash-based CLI accepting flags like -t (target) and -o (output).

    Engine Tier: The "Controller" script that manages logic, error handling, and the calling of external binaries.

    Tool Tier: The underlying security utilities (Nmap, Dig, etc.) that interact with the network.

9. Tools and Technologies Used

    Primary Language: Bash (Bourne Again Shell) / Python 3.

    Networking Tools:

        nmap: Port scanning.

        dig: DNS interrogation.

        whois: Domain ownership.

        curl: HTTP/HTTPS header extraction.

        host: IP-to-Hostname resolution.

    Data Processing: grep, awk, sed, jq.

10. Implementation Details (Code Logic)
10.1 The Main Controller

The script uses a case statement to handle user inputs and a trap function to ensure that if the user hits Ctrl+C, all background scanning processes are killed safely.
10.2 Sample Logic for Port Scanning:
Bash

# Optimized Nmap logic
nmap -p- --min-rate 5000 $TARGET -oG - | grep open > ports.txt

This command scans all ports at high speed, identifies open ones, and saves them in a "grepable" format for the next module.
11. Expected Outcomes

    Terminal Output: High-contrast, color-coded summaries of vulnerabilities.

    Log Files:

        dns_report.txt

        port_scan.txt

        web_headers.txt

        full_summary.md

12. Advantages

    Repeatability: Every test follows the exact same standard operating procedure.

    Training Tool: Helps junior testers learn which tools are appropriate for which phase of a scan.

    Efficiency: Multiple scans happen simultaneously, reducing total engagement time.

13. Limitations

    Intrusiveness: It is not a "stealth" tool. High-speed scanning will likely trigger Firewalls or IPS.

    No Exploitation: It tells you the door is open, but it does not walk through it.

14. Future Enhancements

    Machine Learning Integration: Use ML to predict which ports are likely to be open based on the organization's industry.

    Slack/Discord Integration: Send a notification to the security team as soon as a scan is complete.

    Vulnerability Database: Cross-reference Nmap versions with the National Vulnerability Database (NVD) automatically.

15. Conclusion

The Automated Reconnaissance Framework successfully demonstrates that orchestration is the key to efficient security testing. By combining the power of legacy tools with modern automation, we provide a solution that is faster, more accurate, and more organized than manual testing. This project serves as a practical tool for ethical hackers to secure digital infrastructures against increasingly sophisticated threats.
